PMCID: 7135007
COVID-19: too little, too late?
Although WHO has yet to call the outbreak of SARS-CoV-2 infection a pandemic , it has confirmed that the virus is likely to spread to most , if not all , countries .
Regardless of terminology , this latest coronavirus epidemic is now seeing larger increases in cases outside China .
As of March 3 , more than 90 000 confirmed cases of COVID-19 have been reported in 73 countries .
The outbreak in northern Italy , which has seen 11 towns officially locked down and residents threatened with imprisonment if they try to leave , shocked European political leaders .
Their shock turned to horror as they saw Italy become the epicentre for further spread across the continent .
As the window for global containment closes , health ministers are scrambling to implement appropriate measures to delay spread of the virus .
But their actions have been slow and insufficient .
There is now a real danger that countries have done too little , too late to contain the epidemic .
By striking contrast , the WHO-China joint mission report calls China 's vigorous public health measures toward this new coronavirus probably the most “ ambitious , agile and aggressive disease containment effort in history ” .
China seems to have avoided a substantial number of cases and fatalities , although there have been severe effects on the nation 's economy .
In its report on the joint mission , WHO recommends that countries activate the highest level of national response management protocols to ensure the all-of-government and all-of-society approaches needed to contain viral spread .
China 's success rests largely with a strong administrative system that it can mobilise in times of threat , combined with the ready agreement of the Chinese people to obey stringent public health procedures .
Although other nations lack China 's command-and-control political economy , there are important lessons that presidents and prime ministers can learn from China 's experience .
The signs are that those lessons have not been learned.SARS-CoV-2 presents different challenges to high-income and low-income or middle-income countries ( LMICs ) .
A major fear over global spread is how weak health systems will cope .
Some countries , such as Nigeria , have so far successfully dealt with individual cases .
But large outbreaks could easily overwhelm LMIC health services .
The difficult truth is that countries in most of sub-Saharan Africa , for example , are not prepared for an epidemic of coronavirus .
And nor are many nations across Latin America and the Middle East .
Public health measures , such as surveillance , exhaustive contact tracing , social distancing , travel restrictions , educating the public on hand hygiene , ensuring flu vaccinations for the frail and immunocompromised , and postponing non-essential operations and services will all play their part in delaying the spread of infection and dispersing pressure on hospitals .
Individual governments will need to decide where they draw the line on implementing these measures .
They will have to weigh the ethical , social , and economic risks versus proven health benefits .
The evidence surely indicates that political leaders should be moving faster and more aggressively .
As Xiaobo Yang and colleagues have shown , the mortality of critically ill patients with SARS-CoV-2 pneumonia is substantial .
As they wrote recently in The Lancet Respiratory Medicine , “ The severity of SARS-CoV-2 pneumonia poses great strain on critical care resources in hospitals , especially if they are not adequately staffed or resourced . ”
This coronavirus is not benign .
It kills .
The political response to the epidemic should therefore reflect the national security threat that SARS-CoV-2 represents .
National governments have all released guidance for health-care professionals , but published advice alone is insufficient .
Guidance on how to manage patients with COVID-19 must be delivered urgently to health-care workers in the form of workshops , online teaching , smart phone engagement , and peer-to-peer education .
Equipment such as personal protective equipment , ventilators , oxygen , and testing kits must be made available and supply chains strengthened .
The European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control recommends that hospitals set up a core team including hospital management , an infection control team member , an infectious disease expert , and specialists representing the intensive care unit and accident and emergency departments .
So far , evidence suggests that the colossal public health efforts of the Chinese Government have saved thousands of lives .
High-income countries , now facing their own outbreaks , must take reasoned risks and act more decisively .
They must abandon their fears of the negative short-term public and economic consequences that may follow from restricting public freedoms as part of more assertive infection control measures .
